All right.
So this is where things start to get really interesting rather than just messing around with layouts
and colors and backgrounds.
We're going to start to write some actual code and build some interactivity into our apps.
So the usual way to have some basic interactivity is to bring in a button so select the button from
the widget palette at the top left then and then drag it in.
I'm going to put it just underneath the great app.
Text me.
We can put in some
margins if you like and feel free to experiment with different colors styles etc. but we'll focus on
the code for now.
So I'm not going to style that button in any way but the button has a new attribute that text you don't
have and that is the on click attribute.
And this is where we can set a certain function or method to be called and that button is tapped by
the user.
So I'm going to call the method
click function and this is going to be the name of the chunk of code that's run.
When that button is tapped.
All right.
That now gives us an error because we haven't created the click function method yet.
So let's go and do that over in main activity Java.
So this is our first experience of Java.
We saw the main activity file years ago when we were touring Android studio but we didn't take a lot
of time to actually see what it's doing.
Let's quickly do that and then we'll write the code for our click function method.
So first off the main activity is defining the package ID that so we've got coming up my company to
rob example app as we saw when we created this particular project.
Then we've got some import statements and we're importing some frameworks there which allow us to use
certain features of the Android OS.
So our two frameworks here we've got app compact activity which contains the code that we need forhow
activity which has an action bar at the top there.
Whereas his example app and then we've got the OS bundle for the Android OS itself.
As we start to use new features here we'll have to import the code for them up the top do that in a
couple of minutes.
Next we're creating a class.
Now don't worry too much about the terminology here.
But a class is essentially a chunk of code that contains variables such as the content of a text field
and also functions or methods which contain more code.
So the class that we're creating is called main activity.
And this is going to be the class that controls our activity that we've created the class is public
meaning that it can be accessed from anywhere within the app and it extends up compact activity meaning
that it takes all the code from combat activity and allows us to use any methods or variables within
the app combate activity class.
And there's just one method here and that's the on create method is run when the activity is created
or when it appears on the screen there's a few key words here.
So just to run through what I mean.
Again don't get too hung up on the precise meaning of these but it's good to have a rough idea of what
they're are therefore override.
Here is the code that we know that the uncreate method already exists.
It's actually in app combat activity and we're just taking it further and adding some extra code to
it here are we not creating the uncreate method.
We're just adding to it.
The method is defined as protected which is similar to public but slightly less public.
So a protected method can be accessed from anywhere within our app but not from outside the app so couldn't
be accessed by General Android OS for example.
Then we've got this keyword void which means that this method on created doesn't return anything.
So for example you could imagine a That simply adds two numbers together.
When that method is called it returns the total of those two numbers.
In contrast this method doesn't return anything.
It just does some things when the activity is created the variable saved instance state is passed to
the create method.
So that is that if we want to we can write some code that depends on the state of the instance or essentially
the device at that time that could be used for example to tell whether the user is logged in when displaying
the appropriate activity.
And then we've got two more methods.
The first is super to create the super here refers to the uncreate method that we mentioned already
exists in app combat activity.
So we'll run the code to create the activity and then it will run our code.
And finally we're setting the content view which just links the activity with this particular layout.
The activity on the main dot Hexham L that we've created here.
Phew.
So quite a lot of high level Java there.
As I say don't worry too much about the precise meaning of all of that.
As long as you've got a rough idea of what's going on and that this code is setting up our activity.
So if you remember what we were trying to do here is create our Klik function that will be called when
our button is tapped.
So we'll do that in much the same way that we've created our main activity class here.
We'll start with public to create a public method and then we'll have the key word voit because our
method is not going to return anything it's just going to do something and then
a method is called click function.
And because the method is called by the button and the button is a view the click function method will
require a single variable and that variable will have a type of view with a capital V and the specific
value of that variable will call view with a little the and because we're now working with views in
our code we're going to need to import the class for the stuff we just click on The View that and then
you can see if I can make that up display.
I would go see the symbol that implies that if we press alt and then enter that will add the View class
for us so that we can use all the view methods.
So to run that again we've created a public method which doesn't return anything.
It's called click function and it takes a variable called view which is a type of view.
So whenever you create a variable in Java you have the type of variable first which usually starts with
a capital letter and then you have the variable itself which is often the same as the type.
But not always but it always starts with a lowercase letter.
And this view will be the name of the UI element which calls the function which in our case is going
to be that button and you can see that they were Stoeger a warning there but we don't have the error
anymore because the code can see that we've created this function.
All right.
Then we're going to add some open curly brackets.
And you can see Andres studio automatically closes those curly brackets and that's how we contain the
code for our method.
Phew.
Stick with me.
We're almost there.
We just got one line of code to write.
You might be wondering how are we going to get some interaction.
What are we going to do when this button is pressed.
Well with Android studio when you're running an app in the emulator there are some Lokes which we can
use to interact with the app so you can see we've got a load of information there in our logs which
is telling us what's going on behind the scenes.
But we can actually add some code to this log if we want to which is a very useful thing to be able
to do.
So if I can just log a button click in the logs down here.
And we can do that using capital L G for LOEG.
And then we need a particular type of log.
So we use dot and then I'm going to use I for info you can see we've got a few other options there if
an error is a very common one but this isn't this isn't an error.
In fact it tells us that everything is going well.
So we'll use IFA for information.
And then you can say that we need to add the log class for that so.
And we'll add that in for us.
And then in quites we add a tag which is just anything that we want to put there.
Describe the type of log entry that we're making here.
So I'll just put in info we could put anything we wanted there just a category really.
And then the particular log so you can see and Studio 3 does this in a way that Android Studio 2 didn't.
It adds some nice helpful scription as to what each of these variables are.
So the tag is info and the message is whatever we want.
So I'm going to put a button pressed.
And then you can see what a little red squiggly line there telling us that something's wrong with our
code and that's because at the end of a line of code in Java you always put a semi-coma you will be
relieved to hear that we're now done.
So we can run our app and we should now be able to see the button in the app and when we press it with
any luck button press the message will appear in the logs here.
There it is as I button press it and there it is awry.
If you managed to do that.
Congratulations.
It as many times as you like.
That is your first bit of Java code that you've written from scratch and running within your Android
app.
So it might not look hugely impressive but this is actually a really big step forward and the beginning
of how all interactivity with your apps is going to be designed.
Wonderful.
Now of course we did quite a lot of stuff there so I'm going to set you a challenge to do all of this
yourself and we're actually going to create a brand new app rather than working with the same IP every
time we're going to create a new app which will call
interactivity demo.
And it's going to be very simple just going to contain a single button and you can log whatever you
like when that button is pressed.
So just very similar to what we've already got here.
I want you to create the button create the app and then write the code to make that button display something
in the logs.
All right so this is going to be putting everything together in one go because well good luck of you
guys.
All right.
I hope you enjoy that one.
And you managed to do it.
I'm just going to get rid of that interactivity demo and then I'm going to close my existing project
and start a new one.
As we said it's going to be called interactivity demo.
I mean leave everything else the same next level that the same empty activity wonderful and main activity
is the name for our activity.
Great stuff.
So then Android studio should kick into action upgraded we'll put everything together and hey we got.
So I'm going to jump over to lay out.
First of all we nearly that good stuff.
And then we'll get rid of our text view and add in our button
wonderful.
I'm not too worried about lay out but I'll just add the margins in there.
OK.
And I'm going to leave the on click method empty for the moment just to show you another way round of
doing it if you want to write it in that.
You're very welcome to.
But if we create the code first then it will auto fill that box for us.
So let's create our method
it's going to be a public method it's not going to return anything.
So it's void and as before I'll call it click function.
You might recall it something more expressive feel free and it takes a variable of a type view which
will require us to add the view class and the variable name is going to be viewed with a little
every game and now that we've created that method we can actually go back and if we now click on the
dropdown and the on click method you can see it has that function for us.
So whichever way makes more sense to you really to add it there or write the code first and then at
it
and hopefully you remember we LOEG with a capital L and we're going to use an info log.
And then we can set the tag to in.
And this time just for a bit of variety I'll use it worked as the message.
And of course we don't forget our semi-colon at the end.
Make sure we've got all of our classes.
Yep there they go.
All right let's give it a go.
So because this is a new app we need to select deployment target.
We're going to stick to the same device.
And now let's wait for hours to compile and display.
In fact to get the logs up and running
Yay.
So there's a button that's tappet.
And indeed it worked fantastic.
So I hope you have a shiver segment going down your back as you managed to make that work.
I certainly did.
It's really not an overstatement to say that all apps are built on this basic interactivity.
Having said that it's not a great level of interactivity.
All the user can do is press a button.
So what we might want to do is get a bit more information from the user so we might want to have a text
field for example where the user can enter and text and then something is done with that using the button.
And that's what we're going to learn how to do in the next video.